# Optimization Framework (beta)

## Overview

This project is an optimization framework designed to solve complex combinatorial optimization problems using generalized algorithms, including:

* Greedy Algorithm
* Local Search
* Simulated Annealing
* Backtracking

This framework currently only uses the rectangle packer problem. But other optimization problems could be added in the future, and should be able to run with the currently existing algorithms in base_classes/algorithms.py, if problem specific files are added and implemented correctly.
A graphical user interface for visualization and a test environment for strategies is provided for the rectangle packing problem. 

## Task Desciption

This project is the result of a assignment for the course 'Optimization Algorithms' taught by Prof. Dr. Karsten Weihe at the TU Darmstadt.\\
The Problem description is provided in the 'OptAlg.pdf'. 

## Summary
Implement Greedy and local search with three neighborhoods to solve and display the rectangle packer problem. 
Following constraints apply
* The implementation of the algorithms should be generalized, so that the implementation does not tell the reader, which optimization problem is being solved.
* In the implementation of the optimizationproblems there shall not be any algorithm or neighborhood specific methods or variables.
* following neighborhoods should be implemented for local-search
    * geometry based, in which a neighbor is creates by directly moving rectangles inside a box or from one box to another
    * rule based, in which the algorithm works with permutations of the rectangles. The neighborhood is defined by small modifications of the permutation of rectangles.
    * allow partial overlaps, in which a overlap-percentage is initialized at 100% and determines how much the rectangles are allowed to overlap. The percentage gradually decreases and the output shall be a overlap-free solution.
* implement two different picking strategies for greedy algorithm, so two orders where the rectangles will be taken and placed with.
* UI-Constraints
    * visualize the generated solutions
    * allow the user to enter in the UI how the rectangles should be generated
    * the UI allows to run algorithms on the same rectangles multiple times, also with different neighborhoods or rules.
    * do not overlap information
    * try to work with usability and good color contrasts
* Test-Environment Constraints
    * the test environment should be parametritized with amount of instances, amount of rectangles, 2 minimal widths and heights, box length. Then run the implemented algorithms on those instances without visualizing it.
    * Each generation shall create a protocol of the run with run times
    * the test environment should be runnable in two versions:
        * with enoughly little instance size and amounts so the test environment can run through in a couple minutes
        * with enoughly large instance sizes and amounts so the test environment can be a meaningful representator of the correctness of the algorithms.
* every algorithm should pack instances with up to 1000 rectangles in 10 seconds. The solutions should not be able to be improved with the naked eye

## Getting Started
1. Install dependencies
```shell
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

2. run the standard gui
```shell
python main.py
```

3. run the test environment
```shell
python test_env.py
```

4. run the solution viewer
```shell
python solution_viewer.py
```

## Algorithm Process

This project has a total of 4 algorithms implemented:

* Greedy Algorithm: The greedy algorithm is very straight forward. We defined 4 rules for the rectangle packer. Largest area first, smalles area first, largest aspect ratio first or smallest aspect ratio first. Depending on which one is chosen, the rectangles will be placed accordingly

* Local Search Algorithm: The local search algorithm was implemented with 3 different neighborhoods for the rectangle packer. 
    * Geometry based: In the geometry based neighborhood two solutions are neighboring eachother, if one can be produced by removing a item and placing it inside another box or somewhere else in current box. The start solution is creating multiple samples of all rectangles and creating greedy solutions for each of them. After that these sub solutions are merged into one, suboptimal solution
    * Rule based: The rulebased strategy is similar to the greedy algorithm. Here a solution is given, and looked as a permutation. The permutation of rectangles will then be modified by swapping two rectangles and then building up the solution again. The start solution is a solution generated by the greedy algorithm.
    * Allowing Overlaps: In this neighborhood, the rectangles may overlap in the beginning. But over time the allowed overlap percantage will be decreased which will result in a solution without any overlaps in the end. The starting solution is putting one rectangle into their own box and then one by one decreasing the box count.

* Backtracking Algorithm: In the backtracking algorithm, we recursively place rectangles. If we can not find a valid position we backtrack and continue with trying to place the rectangles.

* Simulated Annealing: Given a start temperature, end temperature, cooling tempo, dwell rate and max time we generate new neighbors according to the geometry neighborhood. With a probabilistic decision we determine if we accept the generated solution or not even if its worse.

## Evaluation of solutions in rectangle packing

The evaluate function is designed to assess the quality of a rectangle packing solution by considering multiple aspects: the number of boxes used, space utilization, unused space, and overlapping areas. The goal is to minimize the evaluation score, with lower scores representing better solutions. 

### Components of the evaluation function

1. Number of boxes ($w_1$)
2. Space utilization ($w_2$)
3. Unused space ($w_3$)
4. Overlapping items ($w_4$)

This results in a following calculation of a evaluation: 
$$\text{Score}=(w_1 \times \text{numBoxes})+(w_2\times (1-\text{utilization}))+(w_3 \times \text{unusedSpace})+(w_4\times \text{totalOverlapArea})$$


## Speed up methods

Due to the speed bottleneck of python we utilized different methods to speed things up as much as we can.
* NumPy: we use NumPy for different reasons. Numpy is a strong numerical computing library, which is very helpful due to its efficiency, speed and versatility when dealing with large data sets. Although we need to parse our rectangle data into numpy arrays and do the computations on those, it is still faster than doing the calculations with python loops. 
    * Overlap calculations: Due to the allowed overlap feature we need to calculate the overlaps between rectangles. This we do with a numpy representation of the rectangles in a box. The overlap width and height are calculated like the following: $$\text{overlap\_width}=\max(0, \min(x_1+w_1, x_2+w_2)-\max(x_1, x_2))$$
    $$\text{overlap\_height}=\max(0, \min(y_1+h_1, y_2+h_2)-\max(y_1, y_2))$$

    * Fast copying: Due to the fact, we save interim solutions, we need to create copies of objects, to make them independent and not changed later on. Because of that we first wanted to utilize copy.deepcopy(), which is extremely slow. To overcome this issue we wrote our own methods utilizing NumPy and also the numba compiler to copy the needed objects faster. 

* NJit: using Numbas njit decorator allowed us to overcome the performance bottlenecks of python by compiling the functino to machine code by using LLVM. This leads to immense performance gains.
    * find_valid_placement: The most important thing we use Numba for is the search for valid_placements. We use a occupancy grid to represent a box and its occupied spaces. That we use to build a integral image for faster calculations. The integral image allows us to to calculate the sum of cells in a rectangular area in constant time to check if the space is occupied.
    $$I(x,y)=O(x,y)+I(x-1,y)+I(x,y-1)-I(x-1, y-1)$$
    * $I(x,y)$ is the value at point $(x, y)$ in the integral image.
    * $O(x,y)$ is the value at point $(x, y)$ in the occupancy grid.
    $$A=I(x_2,y_2)+I(x_1-1,y_2)+I(x_2,y_1-1)-I(x_1-1, y_1-1)$$
    * $A$ is the overlap area
    * $(x_1, y_1)$ is the bottom left corner of the rectangle
    * $(x_2, y_2)$ is the top-right corner of the rectangle